Since 2014, there has been a large increase in bank account ownership in Burkina Faso—but more so among men than women. As a result, there is now a significant gender gap in ownership of both bank and mobile money accounts (services that allow users to transfer and store funds via mobile phone). The gender gap between men and women is 16.8 percent for bank account ownership and 18.1 percent for mobile money. Globally, women are 8 percent less likely than men to own a mobile phone, and in Burkina Faso, there is also a disparity in smartphone ownership, with 67 percent of men reporting owning a smartphone compared to 30 percent of women. As detailed in the USAID Digital Strategy, digital technology has the power to promote inclusive growth and foster resilient societies. However, without addressing gender and geographic disparities in the access to and use of digital technologies, digitally augmented programs risk failing the most vulnerable and marginalized populations. The gender gap in access and use is especially important to consider in the Sahel, given the gender disparities in rural life such as land ownership and economic activities outside the household. Digital financial services (DFS) such as mobile money have the potential to better serve women, poor households, and other groups traditionally excluded from the formal financial system. Given this, any efforts to increase account ownership in Burkina Faso should also prioritize financial inclusion of women. Resilience programming is an integral part of USAID’s work in Burkina Faso. As such, the Sahel Regional Office launched the Resilience in the Sahel Enhanced (RISE) program in 2012, which is now in its second phase with RISE II. The goal of RISE II is that chronically vulnerable populations in Burkina Faso and Niger would effectively manage shocks and pursue sustainable pathways out of poverty. With the rapid expansion of digital finance, there are more opportunities to invest in financial infrastructure that meets the needs of women and rural households, providing them with access to the financial resources and tools to smooth consumption and weather shocks, to lead more resilient lives. In 2018, the USAID Sahel Regional Office requested a Digital Agriculture Assessment of Burkina Faso and Niger by USAID’s Bureau for Resilience and Food Security and the U.S. Global Development Lab. The assessment found that women dramatically lag behind men in mobile money account ownership and usage. One of the assessment’s recommendations was to explore the constraints women face in accessing and using DFS. Given the priorities outlined in RISE II and the Digital Agriculture Assessment recommendations, the U.S. Global Development Lab's Digital Finance team partnered with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology D-Lab’s Comprehensive Initiative on Technology Evaluation Program (MIT CITE) and USAID/Sahel Regional Office. The partnership supports research that can provide new insights into the constraints women face in using DFS and the role that DFS can play in increasing female entrepreneurship resilience. These insights can help both implementing partners and service providers develop strategies for reaching more women. From this research, the DFS team and MIT CITE released the "Assessment of the Gender Gap in Access to Digital Financial Services in Burkina Faso." The report summarizes key findings for Burkina Faso, proposes recommendations, and identifies the stakeholders who could potentially implement the recommendations. There are three stakeholder groups: providers, enablers, and conveners. (1) Providers design and deliver DFS (i.e., banks, telecom companies, fintech startups). (2) Enablers facilitate a functional DFS ecosystem by managing institutions, identifying best practices, and designing regulations, policy, and programs (i.e., governments, international donors, NGOs). (3) Conveners aggregate DFS users (i.e., grassroots farmer cooperatives or farmer networks). The findings below provide insights into the barriers women face in accessing and using DFS and the connection between DFS and resilience as perceived by female entrepreneurs. The MIT CITE research team will publish academic papers containing the complete methodology and research results in addition to these preliminary results. To learn more about DFS and resilience, check out USAID’s Digital Financial Services Accelerate the Journey to Self-Reliance infographic.