In a globalized world, food-testing capacity can be attained through the development of proper facilities and expertise in developing countries, with specific needs met by collaboration with established entities in more developed countries. Our team at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln specializes in testing food for molds and mycotoxins. Approximately six years ago, we partnered with Kansas State University, through the Feed the Future Innovation Lab for the Reduction of Post-Harvest Loss (PHLIL). This partnership enabled our team at UNL to collaborate in applied research, education and capacity building to improve food safety and security in stored crops in different countries. Countries where we have made a direct contribution to capacity building in the area of mycotoxin assessment include Guatemala, Afghanistan, Nepal and more recently Honduras, resulting in over 5,000 samples of different food commodities (maize, wheat, feed, chili, peanuts, etc.) analyzed. This capacity building requires the establishment of physical laboratories with the needed equipment, and the training of highly skilled personnel who can properly collect, handle, analyze and report findings of potentially contaminated food samples. Direct training of laboratory personnel in train-the-trainer sessions is an obvious need. Just as important for long-term success, however, is the development of adequate training material and standard procedures for sampling, mycotoxin testing, and the development of routine proficiency evaluation programs for the scientists who have been trained during this process. Locally managed proficiency evaluations are an essential component of a sustainable program. Based on our experience, and in attempt to be inclusive of other potential laboratory testing needs, we have compiled a 7-step guide to better approach the task of building laboratory capacity, both physical needs and staffing, in another country. While projects have specific timelines, it is important not to rush capacity building and to be as thorough as time and budget allow to achieve the initial project goals. Understand that problems will occur in the process, and may need local attention to be addressed in an appropriate context. Be flexible, patient, resourceful and work with what you have or is available, while keeping in sight the targeted goals and outcomes. With patience, persistence and partnership, the newly established in-country laboratory will provide evidence-based data for the national system to address agricultural challenges within and well beyond the life of the project. For their commitment and collaboration, we would like to thank other researchers that are part of our team at UNL Dr. Luis Sabillón, Cody Brown and Donna Morrison, as well as KSU key collaborators Dr. John Leslie and Dr. Jagger Harvey.