This blog was co-authored by James F. Oehmke, Senior Policy Advisor, USAID Bureau for Resilience and Food Security (RFS) and Adjunct Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Northwestern University; Billy Hall, Policy and Communications Advisor, USAID RFS; and Shawn Wozniak, Agricultural Development Officer, USAID RFS. To date, COVID-19 has affected urban areas more quickly and more prevalently than rural areas, and this has important implications for development policy. At least since 1776, when Adam Smith first published The Wealth of Nations, the conventional wisdom has been that development consists primarily of moving people out of a rural, subsistence-farming based livelihood and into an urban, wage-labor livelihood. The emergence of urban areas as hotspots of COVID-19 begs for a re-examination of that conventional wisdom. The argument for urbanization is based on an assumed superior ability of urban areas and governments to provide both private and public services. Private services include jobs, housing, and other amenities including intangible benefits such as better networking opportunities. The concept of agglomeration economies posits that it is more efficient to provide these services in a setting with a high population density. For example, multiple employers may want to locate near a sustainable labor force, workers may want to locate near multiple employment opportunities, and either traditional word-of-mouth or modern information platforms may help match employer needs with applicant skills. Public sector services including utilities, health services, public transportation, public safety nets, etc. may also benefit from urban agglomeration effects. These benefits of population-dense areas have led to policy recommendations for accelerating urbanization, including policies to move people into primary cities as fast as possible. Even before COVID-19 there was a growing pushback on the model of urbanization, especially in primary cities as the end-stage of development. Emerging literature shows that in large primary cities the negative consequences of spatial clustering may be displacing agglomeration economies. Kim, Hewings and Nam modeled the optimal size of the Seoul, Korea metropolitan area, finding that a 30 percent decrease in the area’s share of national population would be associated with up to a 27 percent increase in Korean GDP.  The current overpopulation was explained in part on negative externalities imposed on smaller cities (that would have benefitted from agglomeration) and an urban bias in government policy. Water management (too much or too little) is a global problem from subsidence in places like Mexico City and Saint-Louis, Senegal to water rationing in Cape Town, South Africa to flooding in Accra, Ghana and China’s Pearl River delta, among many others.  Standard economic growth accounting that underlies urban agglomeration models has come under scrutiny for not accounting for the full cost of resource use, leading to the development of alternative accounts such as the System of Environment Economic Accounting. As Lee and Kim (2018) show, including the negative ecological effects from rapid urbanization reduces per capita income in Seoul, Korea by over $2,000. Gyourko et al (2013) demonstrated that successful U.S. urban income growth is associated with increasing income inequality. Buckley and Mathema (2008) have replicated these findings for Accra, and Quintana-Castells and Royeula (2015) have argued that this is a global symptom of growth. The emergence and rapid growth of urban slums is a significant problem in many developing-country capitals.  Christiaensen and Todo (2014) have argued that movement from rural areas to secondary cities is more poverty-reducing than movement to primary cities. COVID-19 has forced a further re-examination of the assumptions underlying the conventional wisdom of rapid urbanization. Social distancing, self-isolation, and health services have proved hard to deliver even in ‘superstar cities’ such as New York, Chicago and Los Angeles, let alone cities such as Flint, Michigan that have had prior issues delivering public services such as potable water. It is likely that these problems will be multiplied in developing-country capital cities with already weak infrastructure and health systems. The coronavirus prevalence rates in the U.S. give tantalizingly incomplete but frightening clues about the urbanization of COVID-19. For example, on April 3, 2020, the City of Detroit, Michigan and the three primary counties in the Detroit metropolitan area had 8,584 (roughly 79.5 percent) of Michigan’s 10,791 confirmed cases of coronavirus. Lake County, Michigan’s poorest county with a 22.6 percent poverty rate and no urban areas (the largest village has a population just over 1,000), has no reported cases of coronavirus. Other U.S. hotspots are mostly urban, including New York, Chicago, Seattle, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, New Orleans and Miami. Another common pre-conception is that in the event of a pandemic, it is better to be in cities where there is better access to health system services. European and American hospitals in the most infected areas are stressed, with anecdotal reports of sick patients being cared for in hallways, pleas for equipment donations, and potential disruptions to non-COVID medical care. Particularly in the case of a virus where curative medicine offers few options, access to an overcrowded hospital seems to be a weak benefit at best. The implications for rural and urban food insecurity seem obvious but remains largely undocumented: with greater disease prevalence and greater logistical challenges, urban areas likely will face the highest increase in food insecurity. Particularly in those developing countries with large rural populations that rely on agriculture as their primary livelihood source, urban areas may be hit the hardest. Primary coastal cities that rely on imported food may face both transport issues at the country of origin and illness-related logistical issues from the port of entry through retail distribution. The organization and structure of agricultural and food processing provides an informative example.  Conventional wisdom is to ship raw agricultural products to a processing plant near urban markets to take advantage of economies of scale in food processing. For example, the growth of Chicago after the Civil War and into the 20th century was due in significant measure to the meat processing industry, when cattle from Texas and the Great Plains were herded to rail heads and then transported to Chicago for processing. This works well as long as the transport system is functioning and food processing workers are not absent from work due to sickness. But raw agricultural materials, especially livestock, are bulky and sometimes difficult to transport.  When there are acute stresses on the transport system and/or urban labor availability, a more decentralized processing industry using multiple transportation networks has the advantage. Feed the Future’s Projet Croissance Economique helped support multiple rice processors along the Senegal River Valley, which provides an example of a decentralized but very successful food processing industry. Simultaneously, the decentralization of agro-processing provides an opportunity to re-examine the role and structure of secondary and tertiary cities in development, particularly in countries with large rural populations. Given the rate at which COVID-19 spreads, the level of economic disruption it has caused, and the toll it has taken on urban areas, now is an important time to re-examine the conventional development model of migration to primary cities. Because the most immediate health and food needs will be in cities, humanitarian aid will appropriately focus there, and it will be tempting to simply draw lessons learned about how to better prepare existing cities for and/or distribute aid in the next crisis. But a sustainable solution requires a more systemic perspective that asks, how can development right-size existing and future cities to optimize both resilience and prosperity? And secondly, what kinds of policies and development strategies would encourage populations to distribute themselves across these cities in a socially optimal way? The conventional model of development was never truly about resilience. Now that COVID-19 is bringing home the importance of resilience, it is time to start the dialog on what sizes and types of urban areas can best contribute to sustainable, resilient development. References Buckley, Robert M. and Mathema, Ashna S. 2007. “Is Accra A Superstar City?” Policy Research Working Paper 4453. Washington DC: The World Bank. https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/book/10.1596/1813-9450-4453 Castells-Quintana, David and Royuela, Vicente. 2015. “Are Increasing Urbanisation and Inequalities Symptoms of Growth?” Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy 8:291–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12061-015-9146-2 Christiaensen, Luc and Todo, Yasuyuki. 2014. “Poverty Reduction During the Rural–Urban Transformation – The Role of the Missing Middle.” World Development, 63(C):43-58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.10.002 Gyourko, Joseph, Mayer, Christopher, and Sinai, Todd. 2013. "Superstar Cities." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4):167-99. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.5.4.167 Kim, Euijune, Hewings, Geoffrey, and Nam, Kyung-Min. 2013. “Optimal Urban Population Size: National vs Local Economic Efficiency.” Urban Studies 51(2):428-445. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098013489737 Lee, Hye Kyung and Kim, Hwan Yong. 2018. “Economic Growth for Ecological Conversions: South Korean Case. Environmental Sciences Europe, 30(21). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-018-0149-x