New mobile phone application, Mausam, helps users in India access weather forecast information and receive warnings of impending weather events. The Mausam app is the result of a collaboration between the India Meteorological Department, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology. Echoing these words that highlight the importance of adapting to changing weather, scientists have been striving for a tool for efficient and easy dissemination of weather forecasts and information. With time, significant advancements in the field of weather forecasting have been made, though the timely dissemination of weather information and early warnings has always been a challenge. As floods wreaked havoc in the Indian regions of Assam and Bihar this past monsoon season, devastating the livelihoods of many farmers and endangering the general public, the importance of disseminating knowledge and information relating to weather forecasts and early-warning services has been bolstered. With a vision to improve the access and use of various weather forecasting products, the India Meteorological Department of the Ministry of Earth Sciences has embarked upon various initiatives in recent years to improve climate information dissemination. As a step in this direction, the India Meteorological Department has launched a mobile phone-based application titled Mausam — a Hindi language translation of the word "weather." The application was designed and developed in collaboration with the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM). The application communicates weather information and forecasts to the general public in a lucid manner, without using technical jargon. The information in the app was made readily accessible and easily understandable. Also, the information is presented by an interactive interface through which users can access observed weather, forecasts, radar images and be proactively warned of impending weather events. The Mausam app was developed to provide timely access to weather forecasts and early warnings. The app is available on the Google Play Store and Apple App Store, and will offer the following services: It is our hope that the Mausam mobile app becomes an important tool to engage with the general public on weather-related information and thus improve the linkage across the climate information chain.