Unpacking a USAID and BMGF partnership project on early generation seed systems by studying ten seed systems across the world, this post was written by Veronica Mulhall on behalf of Context Global Development. 

In a mature seed system, farmers have reliable and timely access to affordable, high-quality seed. Our partnership study of ten diverse seed systems around the world identified seven characteristics – or building blocks – of mature seed systems. The existence or absence of these building blocks can be indicative of a seed system’s success, and in the mature systems that we studied, most of these building blocks were in place. As illustrated in Figure 1, two building blocks fall squarely under public sector domain and another two are clearly led by the private sector. The other three building blocks represent areas in which a partnership between public and private organizations is critical for the sustained production and distribution of early generation seed.  In even the most mature seed systems, the public sector plays a vital role in varietal development and agricultural extension. This is done sustainably through established and reliable funding sources such as recurring funds from government research institutions and universities, as well as competitive grants. Key operating costs funded by the public sector include researcher salaries and benefits, consumables, and facility upkeep such as office space, fields, labs, and acclimatized storage. In the Idaho potato seed system, research and varietal development are funded by several public sources including universities, the Agricultural Research Service of the USDA (USDA-ARS), and the National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA). The superintendent of Aberdeen Research and Extension Center is the only University of Idaho employee hard-funded by the university, while all other employees are funded through NIFA grants. USDA-ARS provides overhead funding for ARS employee salaries. In India, dedicated and reliable public sector funding exists for varietal development, commercially valued research, and seed production. Continuous, centrally coordinated, locally researched varietal development is conducted by the National Agriculture Research System (NARS)-ICAR, one of the world’s most well-funded ($890 million annually to ICAR) and trained agriculture research systems (approximately 7,000 scientists) in the world. In Arkansas, qualified extension agents from the Arkansas Rice Research and Extension Center (RREC) develop personal, trust-based relationships with farmers who rely on agents’ recommendations when making profit-impacting decisions such as varietal selection, planting timing, seeding rates, row spacing, irrigation, pesticide application, irrigation, drain timing, and harvest.  In mature systems, breeding teams work closely with growers, seed companies, and industry to develop varieties with a differentiated value over saved seed, thereby increasing growers’ willingness to pay for improved seed. The commercial success of new varieties and breeding program longevity rely on continuous input and collaboration from industry and growers. Mature breeding programs have deep empathy for farmers’ needs and evaluate thousands of lines annually for the agronomic and grain traits that matter most. Farmer participatory breeding strengthens the relationship between breeders and growers, stretches public sector resources, hastens varietal speed to market, enables bulking prior to release, and stimulates the adoption of new varieties.The public sector leverages private sector feedback from on-field performance trials and grain testing to increase the efficiency of its resource allocation and to improve the commercial adoption of new varieties. Embrapa’s participatory breeding program is a key part of its research and development program. Embrapa provides approximately 30 farmers across two key banana regions with region-specific hybrids to evaluate for two years. After this testing period, farmers share feedback with Embrapa on both agronomic characteristics and market/end user receptiveness. Access the full case study Arkansas rice farmers trust the Arkansas Rice Research and Extension program to deliver research findings and new varieties that improve the profitability of their operations. Growers have planted Arkansas-released varieties for more than 100 years and are proud of  the institution’s contribution to the rice industry. Through the Rice Research and Promotion Board, growers are actively involved in guiding research priorities and disseminating information from the program.  Public sector organizations assume the responsibility and risk of parental seed demand planning and production. Attentive cost management and pre-ordering of EGS by commercial seed producers supports the organization’s ability to recover its operating costs. The Michigan Crop Improvement Association (MCIA) serves as the key link between the private sector and Michigan State University's Dry Bean Breeding and Genetics Program. MCIA is the state’s seed certification authority, and it also licenses nearly all newly released varieties and is responsible for foundation seed demand planning, production, and order fulfillment. MCIA’s ability to effectively manage demand planning through constant communication with growers and the industry has enabled it to be a financially self-sustaining nonprofit. MCIA adds value to the industry by assuming exposure to the risk of errant demand projections by certified seed companies. In the absence of MCIA, the public and private sector would have to take on the commercially unattractive functions of dry bean EGS multiplication and certification. The Nuclear Seed Potato Program (NSPP) operates on a yearly production planning cycle to ensure that supply meets demand. Growers typically place orders in December to receive mini-tubers or plantlets by the following fall. The program does not assume surplus demand, which encourages growers to plan for their planting needs well in advance. Instead of binding contracts, growers make informal agreements for picking up and paying for seed. Self-regulation in adhering to the informal agreements is made effective on the basis of grower reputation being dependent on following through on ordering commitments. In India, a well-coordinated, efficient process for breeder seed demand forecasting and production planning is in place. Demand is tabulated using a bottom-up approach, wherein State Departments of Agriculture (SDAs) collect and submit indents (orders) from varying seed producing agencies and seed associations (on behalf of their membership) to the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), Ministry of Agriculture, and Government of India (GOI). Production planning is done top-down, with the DAC compiling and submitting demand information to the crop project coordinator at the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), which performs the final allocation of production responsibility to the appropriate ICAR institutions/SAUs. The Seed Management Information System (SMIS), which is maintained and coordinated by the GOI, provides information access and transparency around seed production and order fulfillment, seed certification, seed law enforcement, progress report of seed testing laboratories, and database of notified varieties.  Mature EGS systems are strengthened by long-standing interpersonal relationships and close geographic proximity of seed system actors, which enables a well-coordinated seed production planning process and helps reduce transaction costs. Arkansas rice production is concentrated in the eastern counties of the state, spanning about 250 miles from north to south. The geographic proximity of breeders, researchers, agricultural extension officers, seed companies, seed certifiers, growers, grower cooperatives, and processors facilitates the development of trust-based relationships and supports an intense focus on addressing the prioritized issues of a largely homogeneous agro-ecological environment. Located in the heart of Saskatchewan’s main pulse-growing region, the University of Saskatchewan acts as a central hub for important actors in this EGS system. The main organization involved in new variety development and testing (Crop Development Centre), the provincial commodity association (Saskatchewan Pulse Growers), the key bridging organizations (Ag-West Bio and Food Centre), and national research organizations (The National Research Council, Agri-Food Canada) are all either on the university campus or within a 15-minute drive. A strong level of trust exists between these key system actors, which is aided by their close proximity and ability to meet in-person, both formally and informally. The seed quality assurance system is fit-for-purpose, industry-respected, adequately resourced, efficiently managed, and adds more value to farmers than the costs it imposes. In mature systems, certification agencies are viewed as partners entrusted to be the custodian of the seed sector. In Arkansas, the State Plant Board is viewed as adding value to the agricultural system and not as a policing agency. Arkansas’ reputation for premium-quality rice is supported by the agency’s efforts to assure the quality of seed sold in the state. Stakeholders – especially breeders, seed companies, and farmers – appreciate the Arkansas State Plant Board’s role in protecting the industry. Disease pressure at various historic points have re-established trust in tissue culture material and necessitated more active government regulation in the industry. Through these regulations, all private biofactories are required to submit 0.2% of their materials to be tested by accredited labs for diseases and minimum quality and genetic variation standards. Additionally, three classifications of planting materials are legally defined and provide the framework for multiplication/testing rigor and genetic origin. Given historic issues with disease outbreaks, the industry is unified in its commitment to address the threat of TR4, a fungal disease prevalent in virtually all other major banana-producing countries. Production quality has differentiated Michigan farmers’ black beans and is a reason why they command a price premium in key export markets (e.g., Mexico). Michigan Crop Improvement Association (MCIA)’s strict seed certification process assures growers that the certified seed they purchase and plant is true-to-type and disease free. MCIA is unreserved in rejecting fields that do not meet the state’s seed certification requirements, as evidenced by the ~30% rejection rate of fields evaluated for certification. \  In mature seed systems, private and public sector stakeholders are jointly committed to funding the operations that enable varietal development, research programs, and bridging organizations. This level of alignment increases farmer profitability through methods such as sponsored grants and check-off fund allocations. Saskatchewan pulse growers value and support an end-point levy for research funding, which is applied on the sale of (pulse) grain. Growers’ commitment to supporting research is exemplified by the SPG’s decision to double the levy in 2002, from 0.5% to 1%. The end-point levy, captured at the sale of the commodity, applies regardless of whether the production originated from saved or purchased seed (25-30% of pulse area is planted with certified seed annually). The end-point levy reduces growers’ input costs (as compared to a varietal royalty scheme) and better links the timing and cost of funding research with when growers realize the value of past research. Arkansas rice farmers’ desire for quality seed supply and improved varieties predates the required check-off programs started in 1985. Prior to 1985, growers voluntarily contributed to funds directed toward industry promotion and later, specifically toward the research of new rice varieties. Growers’ willingness to pay out of their own profits factored into the success of the breeding program and overall rice industry growth. Furthermore, robust grower interest in serving in leadership and committee roles of two voluntary funding groups has been central to continued success. These groups eventually merged to become the AR Rice Research and Promotion Board, which is still in place today.  Trust-based relationships between farmers, seed producers, and distribution partners support investments, demand planning, and product lifecycle management decisions. Bridging organizations – which don’t have a financial stake in the game – also play an important role. These bridgers, such as Ag-West Bio inSaskatchewan, serve as catalysts in creating strong, trusted networks Seed growers anticipate commercial demand through a deep understanding of farmer operations and market dynamics. Seed growers lean on their experience and industry connections to operate at optimal production capacity. They are also well trained through repeated interactions with Idaho Crop Improvement Association on how to achieve certification standards. The best seed growers operate on a four-year production planning cycle and do not plan for oversupply, recognizing that it is extremely difficult for growers to market surplus potatoes once the potatoes are stored for extended periods because of changes in fresh market and processing qualities. A seed grower coop has developed an alternative channel for the “big uglies” that cannot be sold into traditional channels, but growers do not rely on this channel’s availability when planning their supplies. Growers only supply varieties that customers demand and are reluctant to bring on new varieties that have not been sufficiently requested. In Brazil, biofactories are able to meet demand for tissue culture-derived plantlets  because of stable varietal preference and advance farmer ordering. Large farmers consistently replant 10-20% of their area with TC materials annually, resulting in consistent demand. Each biofactory maintains its own clonal gardens that ensure ample supply of mother plants by variety, based on consistent demand year over year. Farmers typically pay for 30-50% of their order at the time it is placed, with the remaining payment made in three or more installments after delivery of the materials.. This practice shares the risk between the two parties and allows flexible financial arrangements based on farmer circumstances. In Michigan, seed companies are in daily communication with their commercial farmer customers and have vertically integrated commodity trading companies to anticipate certified seed demand. Dry bean certified seed dealers meet each year to share information on the anticipated supply of dry beans, by variety, for the coming year.