The social impacts of COVID-19 have important implications to food security and, like many other social and environmental calamities, are not gender or spatially neutral. In many regions across the world, deep-rooted gender norms that devalue women’s unpaid domestic labor burdens also marginalize the health, nutrition, and decision-making power of women and girls. In 2017, FAO reported that women account for nearly 60% of all people living in hunger, highlighting the potential to address both food security and poverty alleviation by addressing gender inequalities. Extension and advisory services (EAS) is a vehicle for addressing food security and poverty alleviation, and FAO highlights the importance of gender to that equation. Reports indicate that food security and health risks for women and children are increased during crises because women occupy nearly 70% of the healthcare workforce. Women’s roles in healthcare increase their work burdens and risks to contract and transfer COVID-19. The United Nations Population Fund suggests that crises also hinder the ability of women to access critical sexual and reproductive health services as well as support systems for domestic-based violence; this is especially true for women refugees. While research on the gender dimensions of emergencies remains limited, the effects are inevitably compounded by place-based social norms as well as individual or household access to resources and information––in addition to a person’s agency to use them. Women that are racial minorities, disabled, and/or in low-income groups will face additional intersectional challenges. In times of crisis, these already marginalized groups of women and children face increases in malnutrition and food insecurity. Lessons learned from past crises, such as the Ebola epidemic that ripped across West Africa from 2014-2016, underscore the crucial role of social capital in supporting emergency response efforts and facilitating rapid behavior change. This is particularly relevant for hard to reach rural areas that account for a large portion of communities in West Africa––communities that depend on subsistence and small-scale farming for both food security and livelihoods. In Liberia, for example, 70% of the population derives a portion of their income from agricultural activities, and 49% live in rural areas. This highlights the crucial role of governmental EAS to provide information and resource input to all farmers, including women. Unfortunately though, infrastructure, low resource capacity, and inequality in service dissemination continute to remain barriers for rural women farmers during COVID-19. Given these gender dynamics and realities, could existing EAS and the trusted local personnel that disseminate them be adapted and targeted to serve more effectively in times of crisis? Specifically, could they address the unique and intersectional challenges of women farmers? This post highlights specific gaps in the ability of EAS to address the needs of rural farmers, specifically women, that are increased during emergencies. For example, globally, women report lower access to extension services, as well as information and communication technology devices (radios, cell phones), risk-sharing networks outside of their communities (village savings and loan groups), household power to make decisions, and time to allocate to innovative and adaptive agricultural solutions. In addition, this post addresses the risks that such gender and place-based gaps present to rural food security and social stability, specifically in low- and middle-income countries. Below are specific challenges related to EAS access. In light of these challenges, principally in low- and middle-income countries, there is potential for EAS to play a more central role to provide critical information, resources, and reassurance to farmers and communities during COVID-19 and future emergencies, including the unique challenges faced by women. This is especially relevant for hard to reach rural communities that have existing relationships and, therefore, trust with their local extension providers. There is an urgency for EAS to respond in this pandemic because of their trusted role in agricultural communities; doing so requires their efforts to transmit information about healthy behaviors and how farmers can stay well while maintaining their livelihoods. A more gender-aware approach is vital for EAS to generate effective and equitable solutions that holistically address the added food security, poverty, and healthcare consequences that lie ahead due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It is critical that EAS respond to this role during COVID-19. Here are some examples of what they can do. The long-term goals of gender-aware extension services are to increase resilience in recognition that there will be future pandemics. Former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the first elected female head of state in Africa, highlighted in her recent reflections to the BBC that the COVID-19 response requires all hands on deck through united local and global efforts. When emergency responses to COVID-19, including EAS, don’t incorporate intersections with gender and rural landscapes, the risk of harm and exposure to women and girls will continue to increase. Building on the existing knowledge and trust infrastructure of national extension systems may serve to address global food security and poverty alleviation­ by confronting systemic local and national gender inequalities. EAS can increasingly be at the forefront of local efforts to curb food insecurity through gender specific approaches to emergency response.