This post is written by Dr. Laté Lawson-Lartego, Director Food Systems, Oxfam America. “In addition to my fear for health because of the COVID-19 pandemic, I am also concerned about food scarcity and prices skyrocketing. The price of smoked herring which is a basic source of protein we buy from traders from Ghana has doubled overnight as the government is closing down marketplaces as well as borders”. Those are a few words from my mom in Togo when I spoke to her last, to check on her amid the COVID-19 spread. While I applaud governments in Togo and elsewhere on the continent for taking these difficult and devastating —  but necessary — measures to slow down the COVID-19 spread, they should carefully think through the implications of social distancing for every segment of their population. Moreover, they should analyze how these measures will impact local food systems and the women and men who produce, process and sell food for their living. In places like Togo and many other African countries, cross border trade for food and other goods are important for daily life. In addition, with over 70 percent of the workforce in the informal sector without any social protection and health insurance, if the lockdown and social distancing are prolonged, prolongation of social distancing could have a devastating impact on income and livelihoods as well as food and nutrition security for workers up and down the food chain. Consumers in cities will not be spared either if food availability is thrown into jeopardy or if prices increase. COVID-19 is already pushing economies around the world into turmoil. The think tank IFPRI estimates that with the global economy contraction, over 140 million people could be pushed into poverty. This will have direct, negative consequences for hunger and food insecurity. In rich countries such as here in the U.S., we see Congress and the Government include measures to stimulate the economy, protect people living in or near the poverty line and protect workers forced to stay home with generous unemployment benefits and other protections. Sadly, in Africa, this won’t be the case as many governments are paralyzed with heavy debt. Many informal workers will have to depend on the solidarity and generosity of their family in-country and in the diaspora. While preventing the spread of Coronavirus and addressing the healthcare needs of people should be and remains the number one priority for the government, they should not forget the livelihood as well as the food and nutrition security of their citizens. If innovative solutions are not found and people are worried about what to eat and other basic needs, they will not respect the lockdown and social distancing that are necessary to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. This, in turn, will expose many people in Africa and other developing countries to a greater risk of infections. Are governments in Africa prepared for the worst-case scenario? Concerns about food prices as expressed by my mom are amplified by a number of analyses by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and World Food Programs, many think tanks and media outlets demand thoughtful action. Governments should make sure that food trade is not interrupted, prices remain stable, and incentives are provided to all key players in the food chain to ensure that people, especially the most vulnerable populations — including seniors, children, and students — have access to healthy and nutritious food. Ten recommendations are listed below for the use of African governments and other continents to consider as they deal with COVID-19 and put in place an Emergency Food & Nutrition Security plan for their population. These recommendations are based on years of experience in working on food and nutrition security and food systems issues in a number of crisis situations as well as on well-documented evidence from literature: We hope these recommendations are useful and will help prevent hunger and food insecurity as we fight this pandemic. Nutritious food is a source of vitality and good health. We are already hearing alarming outcries from citizens in Africa in countries such as Togo where my mom lives, as well as other countries such as Zimbabwe and many more. People fear to die from hunger more than COVID-19. Governments should do all they can, in partnership with one another, the private sector and civil society, to combat this pandemic. The number one emphasis is on strengthened engagement with the private sector to maintain food supplies through supply chains and markets, wherever possible, but safely. They should put their population at the center, ensure that the food sector is considered essential, instill policies to make sure everyone gets enough to eat and respects all the prevention measures. However, it is important to note that there is limited capacity of humanitarian aid and government safety nets to deal with the far-reaching global consequences of a global pandemic. References: