In this video, two Fish Innovation Lab quick start teams discuss their work in Zambia. U.S. PI Kathleen Ragsdale, U.S. co-PI Mary Read-Wahidi, and Zambia co-PI Pamela Marinda discuss their team's research about household nutrition, and U.S. PI Delbert Gatlin discusses his team's study focused on alternative fish feed for tilapia farms to address improved sustainability in aquaculture.  Information About Zambia Feeds
This project investigates the effect of partially or totally replacing fishmeal by single-cell protein (SCP) ingredients in a tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) commercial feed. Project activities include studying the effect of partial or total replacement of fishmeal by SCPs on the growth, survival, nutrient utilization, condition factor, and gut health in tilapia; estimating the optimum level of substituting fishmeal with single cell proteins in tilapia diets; and determining which of the two SCPs tested is more appropriate for tilapia nutrition. Replacement of fishmeal has the potential to increase profitability and sustainability of tilapia aquaculture in Zambia. This project will also provide institutional capacity development for Natural Resources Development College (NRDC) in Lusaka by improving facilities and building faculty expertise, and it will provide individual capacity development for NRDC faculty and students participating.

Information About Fish4Zambia
This project aims to increase quality/quantity of fish benefitting nutrition and food security in Zambia, especially for women and children in the first critical 1,000 days of life. Project objectives include assessing the current state of small fish capturing, processing, and trading activities, identifying the social and gender barriers to entry and/or participation in these value chain activities for the different actors, particularly women and youth, assessing how small captured fish are accessed by different consumer groups and consumed within households, exploring the potential of upgrading the small fish value chain by improving processing, storage, and trading methods to reduce post-harvest losses and improve food safety, and exploring the use of small dried fish for further processing into fish powder and incorporating into locally appropriate foods for enhanced nutrition.