In Senegal, mobile money growth is boosting financial account ownership, a common measure of financial inclusion; but it is necessary to ensure all parts of the population realize the benefits of digital financial services (DFS) to continue expanding financial inclusion. According to the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), Senegal’s DFS market has significantly transformed over the past five years. Adults with an active DFS account (defined as having conducted at least one recent transaction per month) increased from 13 percent in 2014 to 29 percent in 2019, and the number of active DFS agents has risen from 54 to 192 agents per 100,000 adults. DFS agents are third-party entities who contract with e-money issuers that offer financial services through mobile phones. These agents can perform the entire suite of services offered by the mobile money product, and they are the primary points of contact for the service. Digital programming must account for gender and geographic disparities in access and use of digital technologies to see continued growth in DFS markets. Inclusive access and use are core to the USAID Digital Strategy, which charts a vision for USAID and partners to support open, secure, and inclusive digital ecosystems. When designed to be accessible, DFS can offer greater convenience, security, and the ability to save easily. In 2018, USAID/Senegal requested a digital agriculture assessment by Digital Development for Feed the Future, a collaboration between the U.S. Global Development Lab (Lab) and the Bureau for Resilience and Food Security. The assessment recommended research to understand how and why farmers may or may not adopt the use of DFS products in Senegal. Based on these recommendations, USAID’s Digital Finance Team and Massachusetts Institute of Technology D-Lab’s Comprehensive Initiative on Technology Evaluation Program (MIT CITE) conducted a study to understand how to serve the most vulnerable populations in Senegal. The study explored perceptions, barriers, and enablers and focused on specific groups as part of  Feed the Future's zones of influence (identified in the Global Food Security Strategy Senegal Country Plan). In May 2020, the Digital Finance Team and MIT CITE released the research report, “Assessment of Potential Opportunities for Use of Digital Payments for Smallholder Farmers in Northern and Central Senegal.” MIT CITE also conducted similar research in Guatemala and Burkina Faso. The report presents six key findings and related recommendations to encourage the use of DFS by smallholder farmers in Northern and Central Senegal. The recommendations also ensure supply-side stakeholders are aware of and responsive to smallholder farmers’ needs and preferences. These recommendations could be divided in three categories and supported by providers, enablers, and conveners: Key findings include the following: *The researchers determined financial inclusion by asking respondents about bank account ownership, usage, as well as savings, borrowing, transfers, payments and insurance activities. They determined digital inclusion by mobile phone/computer ownership, usage, etc. The MIT research team will publish academic papers containing the complete methodology and research results in addition to these preliminary results. To read about similar research done in Guatemala and Burkina Faso, check out the blogs, “From Access to Usage: Digital Financial Inclusion of Smallholder Farmers in Guatemala’s Western Highlands” and “Assessing the Gender Gap in Access to Digital Financial Services in Burkina Faso.” To learn more about DFS in agriculture, check out USAID’s Digital Financial Services for Agriculture Guide and Toolkit for Integrating DFS into Feed the Future Programs.